Hello and welcome.
In this lecture I'd like to talk about the open closed design principle
Bertrand Meier proposed the open closed principle by center name correctly or him classes and methods
should be open for extension new functionality basically enclosed for modification.
It's pretty descriptive name.
Open open closed principle open from extension closed for modification.
What that means is would you change.
You shouldn't have a lot of change in classes.
You should only be able to add new things.
A class should be easily extensible without modifying the class itself.
So how do you achieve that.
You may ask yourself and we'll get to that.
A module is said to be open if it is still available for extension it should be possible add fields
to the data structures that contains or new elements to the set of functions it performs so in Java's
case adding new methods.
Adding any kind of new data structures and new collection classes any new things like that should be
easy to do by extending the class without actually having to modify the class itself.
A module is said to be closed if it is available for use by other modules modules in this case are objects
assume that the module has been given a well-defined stable description the interface in the sense of
information hiding not a Java interface right.
We mentioned before the interface is an overloaded term.
In this case it's just a generic interface it doesn't have to be a Java interface.
But again it's closed if it's available for use by other modules.
The general idea of this principle is that it tells you to write your code so that you'll be able to
add new functionality without changing existing code.
It really hits the right in the head of the now there.
It prevents situations in which a change to one of your classes also requires you to adopt all dependent
classes.
Again this cascading effect which will reduce the tightly coupled objects.
Right.
You're not going to have tight coupling if you can make changes without having all these other changes
you need to make in other classes.
Robert C. Martin considered this principle as the most important principle of object oriented design
and if you don't know Robyn C. Martin is look him up.
He's basically the godfather of object oriented design.
He's very very important.
So if he says this principle is a big deal this principle is a big deal.
So pay close attention for this again open for extension.
Adding new functionality close for changes
unfortunately mayor proposed the use of inheritance to achieve this principle.
How do you implement it.
They said inheritance.
This is not the best way to do it because we mentioned before that inheritance introduces tight coupling
because subclasses depend on the implementation of the base class.
Others refine this open closed principle to use more of a polymorphic open closed principle and they
almost renamed it polymorphic and open closed principle.
What this does is it uses interfaces instead of super classes to allow for different implementations.
Interfaces can be reused through inheritance but in imitation nappy so you can easily substitute without
changing the code that uses them multiple mutations have be created and polymorphic fully substituted
for each other.
Again this is programming to an interface.
Our first principle we're using that principle in implementing the open closed principle we want to
use interfaces we want to stay away from inheritance as possibly because of that coupling between subclasses
and base classes interfaces are by definition closed for modifications.
And you can provide new implementations to extend the functionality of your software it's important
to have your interface defined front and you don't want to change it as much every now and then you
do but for the most part closed new implementations must implement the interface so the extension part
here right you can add new functionality very easily to an interface by just adding a new class that
implements that interface but you don't change the interface much so the interfaces introduce an additional
level of abstraction which enables this loose coupling interfaces are independent of each other and
they don't need to share any code usually.
Sometimes they do.
And now.
Nice of Java.
Java later a features there you can have default methods but for the most part they don't need to share
any code so they're independent.
And this promotes loose coupling.
So again to make this easier to understand let's look at an example an ontology that demonstrates this
principle
will open up ontology here.
You know the drill.
Create a simple project I want to demonstrate a rectangle some various shapes project here.
I'll try to do this quicker so we don't have to
let's not create a project from a template.
Let's just name this open closed principal example.
This application is going to calculate areas of various shapes.
So we're gonna first start off with creating a class for our first shape a rectangle which has two attributes
length in a way with so we're just gonna make it by default.
Public here
and just again to simple member variables.
And we're gonna make them public just for demonstration purposes.
Companies so pay attention to that because remember all our member verbals should be public private
for encapsulation.
But we just have to remember verbals length and with pretty basic.
Next thing we want to do is we want to create a class to calculate the area of this rectangle.
It's going to have a method calculate Rectangle area.
It takes the rectangle as an input parameter and calculates Syria.
So class area rectangle or area calculator.
I'm sorry.
This will return a double and take a rectangle as an object as a parameter
and the implementation of this method is is going to just return the rectangle
length times with
pretty basic right.
How to Create.
Create the calculate the area and use mine tell since more often.
So again not too complicated here.
Rectangle area calculator class.
Now say you want to add another shape.
Let's say we want to add a circle.
We're going to create a new class for a circle right.
The circle has one member variable which is a radius.
Again pretty simple there.
So now we need to modify our era calculus class to add circle calculations all right.
So now we want to do the area of a circle.
We have to add another method.
Right.
Public double calculate
Circle area.
And that will take a circle object and to calculate the area of a circle.
We basically just have to return twenty two divided by seven.
And don't ask me about this calculation it's just a circle area calculation.
We take the circle radius times two are squared.
So now we have our calculation of our circle area.
What do you notice about this design right.
It seems like there's some issues right.
What if we want to add another shape then we have to keep modifying the area calculator class as we
add new shapes the era calculator class keeps on changing all the consumers of this class.
We'll have to keep on updating the code to contain area calculator.
All of our new shapes so the area that calculator class is not finalized every time a new shape comes
in.
We have to modify it by adding a new method.
The design is not closed for modification.
The design is also not extensible error calculator will need to keep on adding new logic as you mentioned.
Another method for each new shape we are not expanding the scope of the shapes.
We are adding a new solution for every shape that is added.
So we have to modify this design so that complies with the open closed principle.
The best way to do this is to define interface a shape interface that can have and then have the circle
and rectangle classes implement that shape.
So let's add a new interface
we'll say public interface shape.
And this is going to contain our calculate area method.
And it's not going to take any parameters.
Now we're going to change our rectangle to implement the shape interface.
And so then our logic for implementing the area will be pretty simple we'll just do the link times with
so we're going to implement our public double calculate area
which will just return the link times with.
So I really need you to copy that turn the length times the width and then we would do the same for
the circle.
Probably better organize this a little bit better move circle up here and class circle is going to implement
our shape
and it's going to calculate the radius
by doing that nice function nice method here.
Twenty two times Radius Radius.
And there we go.
This a design is much more extensible the reasons that it's more extensible is there's a base interface
shape now and all shapes.
Now implement the base interface shape right.
We see that with rectangle and circle shape interface has this abstract method calculate area so both
the circle and the rectangle provide their own overwritten implementations of the calculate area.
Using their own attributes right.
Lengthen width inside rectangle in radius inside shape or inside circle sorry.
Shapes are now an instance of shape interfaces.
This allows us to use shape instead of individual classes.
Wherever these classes are used by any consumer so we can modify our area calculator where we can remove
these methods.
We can now add a single method calculate shape area
which takes shape object.
And this just says return shape that calculate area right and you should notice.
This looks like a delegation right.
We're actually assigning responsibility for calculating area to our various shape classes circle and
rectangle and calculate shape area now can also be polymorphic because it takes a shape so it now Eric
calculator doesn't have the design flaws.
This is a clean solution which adheres to the open closed principle.
This resulting design is open for extension more shapes can be added without modifying the existing
code.
We don't have to modify Eric calculator all we have to do is we create a new class for new shape.
Implement the interface and implement the calculate area method with a formula specific to that class.
The new shape the design is also closed from modification area calculated classes complete it can calculate
the area of any shape works for all shapes any classes that implement the shape interface essentially.
So again now we adhere to the open closed principle open for extension by implementing the interface
closed for modification error calculators closed.
So this is a good example of the open closed principle.
As mentioned the very very important principle.
So we'll go through examples again when we implement design patterns that demonstrate this more but
you can also see how this particular implementation also uses delegation.
So a nice little thing here where we can use interfaces and polymorphism and have our implementation
open for extension and close for modification.
Thank you.